chore: add article about Spring Boot performance (#107)
paketo-buildpacks/blog: content/posts/0040-spring-boot-performance.md

---
title: From deprecation warnings to Spring Boot performance - the spring-boot buildpack in 2026
date: "2026-04-15"
slug: spring-boot-performance
author: anthonydahanne
---

# Introduction

The `spring-boot` buildpack is a Paketo Buildpack that is used to build Spring Boot applications.

But what is so special about a Spring Boot application compared to other Java applications?

> The Spring ecosystem, the integration with cloud environment and performance optimizations are peculiar to this Java framework; let's dive into how this buildpack helps you get the most of Spring Boot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Spring ecosystem, the integration with cloud environment and performance optimizations are particular to this Java framework; let's dive into how this buildpack helps you get the most of Spring Boot.
```

Not sure 'peculiar' is the right word here. That's like strage, weird, etc... 

Maybe particular? or specific?

> **Some content in this article was generated with Generative AI; the entirety of the article was reviewed by humans though.**

Reviewer: Hmm, I like the transparency and disclosure here (especially during our PR review), but I worry that putting this right at the top might distract people. My first thought was, oh, ok. So what parts were? That could be me though. My suggestion would be to do this as a footnote or at the end. If the article reads well and provides good information/value, that's what's most important.

A bit of a tangent, but I almost feel like we should have some categories or classifications for blog posts to be transparent about how they were written. Thinking of this almost like movie/TV ratings ...

- Entire article written by AI, then reviewed by a human. (reviewed only, no edits by human)
- Entire article written by AI, reviewed and edited by a human. (reviewed and improved by the human)
- Entire article written by human, parts reviewed by AI. (AI used to provide feedback to human)
- Entire article written by human, parts reviewed and edited by AI. (AI used to provide feedback and rewrite parts)
- Entire article written by human, AI used only for spelling/grammar checking. (Basically Grammarly or advance spell check only).
- Human only. Written on a papyrus, lol. 

Because there's a spectrum of ways you can use this tooling (or not) and that might make a difference to folks. As a steering committee member and project, I don't want to tell people how to write articles (as long as they're high quality and relevant), but I do value transparency, especially in this area, as I know this topic is important to people for various reasons.

Author: > Human only. Written on a papyrus, lol.
haha, I like it 😅 

OK, I'll move that to a footnote providing info on how I used it

# Spring Generations

> One of the quieter but useful features of the `spring-boot` buildpack is that it will warn you when you are building an application that uses an end-of-life version of Spring Boot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the lesser know but useful features of the `spring-boot` buildpack is that it will warn you when you are building an application that uses an end-of-life version of Spring Boot.
```

Quieter may not be the right choice. "lesser know", "hidden", "less frequently used"

Author: I'll apply your suggestion, although there's a typo in it (know**n**), so I'll do it from my IDE

That file is kept automatically up to date by a [weekly workflow](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/spring-boot/blob/main/.github/workflows/update-spring-generations.yml) that queries the [Spring API](https://api.spring.io) and opens a patch-bump pull request whenever new lifecycle data is available.

The content of `spring-generations.toml` looks like this:

```
[[projects]]
  name = "Spring Boot"
  slug = "spring-boot"
  status = "ACTIVE"

    [[Projects.Generations]]
    Name = "3.3.x"
    OSS = "2025-06-30"
    
    [[Projects.Generations]]
    Name = "3.4.x"
    OSS = "2025-12-31"
    
    [[Projects.Generations]]
    Name = "3.5.x"
    OSS = "2026-06-30"
```

At build time, if the detected Spring Boot version falls into a generation whose `oss-end-of-life` date has already passed, the buildpack emits a clearly visible warning:

```
This application uses Spring Boot 2.0.0.RELEASE. Open Source updates for 2.0.x ended on 2019-03-31.
```

> The warning is printed in bold yellow so it is hard to miss in your build logs, but it does **not** fail the build — it is purely informational.

Reviewer: Idk if it's worth mentioning, but I get the impression that very few people actually look at the build logs. Especially in CI. I know I'm guilty of this. I don't look unless something fails.

If this fits into your article, you might make a suggestion about having your CI look for these WARN messages and take some action on them (slack message, etc...).

But optimizing an app can have drawbacks too; let's explore in this post the different ways Paketo Buildpacks can help you optimize your Spring Boot apps.

I invite you to first read the articles on the Spring Blog and documentation site, introducing all the concepts I am going to enable here with the Paketo Buildpacks:

* [CDS with Spring Framework 6.1](https://spring.io/blog/2023/12/04/cds-with-spring-framework-6-1): this is where CDS was introduced to Spring users
* [Spring Boot CDS support and Project Leyden anticipation](https://spring.io/blog/2024/08/29/spring-boot-cds-support-and-project-leyden-anticipation): Project Leyden is getting near and will rename and enhance CDS with AOT Cache
* [AOT Cache](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/reference/packaging/aot-cache.html): with Java 24+ comes AOT Cache, which is the evolution of CDS

We'll be using the [Spring Petclinic](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic) as the example app, and BellSoft Liberica 25 (Petclinic only requires Java 17 but using the latest runtime is usually... faster! and allows for modern optimization features) as the compiler / runtime.

After a fresh checkout of `main`

```

> # get rid of gradle configuration: Spring Petclinic supports both Gradle and Maven, and Gradle is evaluated first (by the Java buildpack) although I want this post to be Maven based since that's still what most developers use today...

Reviewer: You might want this comment, outside of the code block for better formatting (cause it's long and it might scroll in the code block).

### Super easy to do with the spring-boot buildpack!

After a fresh checkout of `main`:

```
> pack build \
 --env BP_JVM_VERSION=25 \
 --env BP_SPRING_CLOUD_BINDINGS_DISABLED=true \
 --env BP_SPRING_AOT_ENABLED=true \
 --env BP_JVM_AOTCACHE_ENABLED=true \
 --env BP_MAVEN_BUILD_ARGUMENTS="-batch-mode -Dmaven.test.skip=true --no-transfer-progress spring-boot:process-aot package" \
   petclinic:aot-cache --clear-cache
> docker run -it petclinic:aot-cache
[...]
Starting AOT-processed PetClinicApplication v4.0.0-SNAPSHOT using Java 25.0.1 with PID 1 (/workspace/BOOT-INF/classes started by cnb in /workspace)
[...]

> Started PetClinicApplication in 2.011 seconds

Reviewer: This is the exact same start up time as the Spring AOT example above? Coincidence?

Author: nah, I probably copied / pasted it unproperly

```
<profile>
    <id>aot-cache</id>
    <build>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
                <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
                <executions>
                    <execution>
                        <id>process-aot</id>
                        <goals>
                            <goal>process-aot</goal>
                        </goals>
                    </execution>
                </executions>
                <configuration>
                    <imageBuilder>paketobuildpacks/builder-noble-java-tiny:latest</imageBuilder>
                    <image>
                        <env>
                            <BP_JVM_VERSION>25</BP_JVM_VERSION>
                            <BP_SPRING_CLOUD_BINDINGS_DISABLED>true</BP_SPRING_CLOUD_BINDINGS_DISABLED>
                            <BP_SPRING_AOT_ENABLED>true</BP_SPRING_AOT_ENABLED>
                            <BP_JVM_AOTCACHE_ENABLED>true</BP_JVM_AOTCACHE_ENABLED>
                        </env>
                    </image>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>
</profile>

> ```

Reviewer: Might help to have a summary or something to wrap things up.

Author: makes sense!
